.TH SYSKIT 1 "2026-07-13" "SysKit 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
syskit \- inspect Linux system state through native kernel interfaces
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B syskit
.RI [ global-options ]
.I command
.RI [ command-options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
SysKit is a Linux-only, read-only system inspection, monitoring, and diagnostics
toolkit. It reads procfs, sysfs, Netlink, and cgroups directly instead of parsing
the output of external system utilities.
.PP
One-shot commands support table, JSON, and YAML output. Use JSON or YAML for
automation; table layout is intended for people. Interactive commands require a
terminal.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " table|json|yaml
Select the output format. The default is table.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " path
Read an explicit TOML configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-\-color " " auto|always|never
Control table header styling. NO_COLOR disables color regardless of this option.
.TP
.B \-\-no-header
Suppress headers in table output.
.TP
.BR \-v , " " \-\-verbose
Enable informational diagnostics on standard error.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug diagnostics on standard error.
.TP
.BR \-q , " " \-\-quiet
Suppress diagnostics and error messages. Exit status still reports failure.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B system
Show hostname, operating system, kernel, architecture, uptime, and load.
.TP
.B cpu
Show CPU topology, identity, counters, and sampled utilization. Supports
\fB\-\-per-core\fR and \fB\-\-interval\fR.
.TP
.B memory
Show memory, swap, cache, and optional pressure-stall information.
.TP
.B disk
Show mounted capacity or sampled device I/O. Supports device, filesystem type,
mount, and interval filters.
.TP
.B filesystem
Show mount, inode, filesystem type, and option details.
.TP
.B process
List and filter processes. The \fBprocess tree\fR subcommand shows parent/child
relationships.
.TP
.B network
Show interface counters. Subcommands \fBinterfaces\fR, \fBroutes\fR, and
\fBdns\fR provide focused views.
.TP
.B ports
Show TCP, UDP, IPv6, and Unix sockets with best-effort process ownership.
.TP
.B containers
Show cgroup-derived container mappings and resource counters. Use
\fBcontainers inspect ID\fR to list associated processes.
.TP
.B diagnostics
Show explainable, read-only health findings. Filter with \fB\-\-category\fR or
\fB\-\-severity\fR.
.TP
.B plugins
Discover and inspect plugin manifests. \fBplugins run NAME\fR explicitly executes
one compatible plugin through the bounded v1 JSON protocol.
.TP
.B dashboard
Open the interactive system dashboard.
.TP
.B top
Open the interactive process monitor.
.TP
.BI "watch " command
Refresh a supported one-shot table command until interrupted.
.TP
.B version
Print the embedded SysKit version.
.TP
.BI "completion " shell
Generate completion source for bash, fish, powershell, or zsh.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default file is \fI$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/syskit/config.toml\fR, or
\fI$HOME/.config/syskit/config.toml\fR when XDG_CONFIG_HOME is unset.
Precedence is command-line flag, environment, per-command TOML section, global
TOML setting, then built-in default.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SYSKIT_FORMAT
Default output format.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_COLOR
Default color mode.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_CONFIG
Explicit configuration path.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_NO_HEADER
Boolean table-header default.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_REFRESH_INTERVAL
Default interval for live commands.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_VERBOSITY
One of quiet, normal, verbose, or debug.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable terminal color when set to a non-empty value.
.TP
.B SYSKIT_PLUGIN_DIR
Colon-separated plugin discovery directories.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General runtime error.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid usage, flag, argument, or filter.
.TP
.B 3
Permission denied while reading a kernel interface.
.TP
.B 4
Required kernel interface unsupported or unavailable.
.TP
.B 5
Partial result; some requested data could not be collected.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/syskit/config.toml
Default user configuration when XDG_CONFIG_HOME is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/syskit/plugins
Default user plugin directory when XDG_DATA_HOME is unset.
.SH SECURITY
SysKit inspection commands are read-only. Plugin execution is an explicit trust
boundary: inspect manifests and executable ownership before running third-party
plugins. Avoid world-writable plugin directories.
.SH SEE ALSO
The complete command reference, compatibility manifests, plugin authoring guide,
and release documentation are distributed with the source repository at
https://github.com/Mersad-Moghaddam/syskit.
.SH AUTHORS
SysKit contributors.
